During a heavy rainstorm in Derry, Maine, six-year-old George "Georgie" Denbrough is chasing a paper boat down a gutter. The boat is washed down a storm drain to the dismay of Georgie, who had received the boat as a gift from his older brother Bill. Peering into the drain, Georgie sees a pair of glowing yellow eyes. Startled, Georgie is suddenly confronted by a man dressed in a silver clown suit who introduces himself as "Mr. Bob Gray", a.k.a. "Pennywise the Dancing Clown". Pennywise offers Georgie a balloon which he cautiously refuses; however, the clown entices Georgie to reach into the drain to retrieve his boat and then severs his arm, leaving the boy to bleed to death or die of shock in the gutter. Moments later, when neighbor Dave Gardener gets to Georgie, Georgie is already dead.

The following June, Benjamin "Ben" Hanscom, an overweight eleven-year-old boy, is harassed by a gang of bullies led by the feared Henry Bowers. On the last day of school, Ben hides from his tormentors in the Barrens after Henry threatens to carve his name onto Ben's stomach with a switchblade, where he befriends Edward "Eddie" Kaspbrak, a hypochondriac boy who believes he has asthma, and William "Bill" Denbrough, Georgie's elder brother, who suffers from a stutter and rides on a rusty bike named "Silver". The three boys later befriend fellow misfits Richard "Richie" Tozier, Stanley "Stan" Uris, and Beverly "Bev" Marsh; they eventually refer to themselves as "The Losers Club".

As the summer draws on, the Losers realize that they have each had an encounter with a seemingly omniscient, alien shape-shifting entity that takes the form of whatever they fear the most: Ben as a mummy, Eddie as a leper, Bill as Georgie's ghost, Richie as a werewolf, Stan as two drowned boys, and Beverly as a fountain of blood spurting from her bathroom sink. Due to the unknown origin of the monster, the Losers refer to the creature as "It" and link It with a series of recent child murders, including that of Edward "Eddie" Corcoran who is killed by the monster in the form of the Gill-man.

Meanwhile, an increasingly unhinged and sadistic Henry Bowers begins focusing his attention on his African-American neighbor, Michael "Mike" Hanlon and his father, including killing the boy's dog. During early July, Henry and his gang chase the terrified Mike into the Barrens, where he meets and is rescued by the Losers, who defeat the bullies in a violent rock fight. Henry, left humiliated and defeated, swears revenge, and Mike joins the now-complete Losers Club. He tells the Losers that he was attacked by It in the form of a flesh-eating bird that tried to kill him in an encounter at the Ironworks remains and shows them his father's scrapbook of old Derry photos, which reveals It has been around for hundreds of years. The Losers begin to suspect that It has control over Derry due to the number of unsolved disappearances and violent tragedies that go unnoticed or seem forgotten by the adults in the town.

After further encounters with It in the form of Pennywise and various other manifestations, the Losers construct a makeshift American-Indian smokehole which Richie and Mike use to hallucinate It's origins. In doing so they discover that It came to Derry millions of years before in an asteroid-like impact and that every 27 years It awakens from a slumber underneath the town's sewers, usually after some kind of terrible event or tragedy, to feed on children for a period of 12–16 months.

In late July, Eddie is hospitalized after an attack by Henry Bowers and several of his friends. Spying on them, Beverly witnesses one of the bullies, Patrick Hockstetter, trying to empty a refrigerator which he had been using to trap and kill injured animals, only to be killed by It in the form of flying bloodsucking leeches. Later, the Losers discover a message from It written in Patrick's blood warning them that It will kill them.

After Eddie is released from the hospital with a broken arm, Ben makes two silver slugs out of a silver dollar, believing that silver will harm It. The kids return to the house on Neibolt Street where Eddie, Bill, and Richie had previously encountered It, and It attacks them in the form of a werewolf. Beverly shoots a slug from Bill's slingshot at the werewolf, injuring It, and causing It to flee back to the sewers. It, now seeing the Losers as a threat, manipulates the minds of Beverly's abusive father, Alvin Marsh, making him angry enough to attempt to kill his daughter; and Henry Bowers, who, provided with his lost switchblade, kills his violent, alcoholic father, Oscar "Butch" Bowers. Henry, accompanied by his two closest friends, Victor "Vic" Criss and Reginald "Belch" Huggins, chases the Losers into the sewers with the intention of killing them.

At this point the narrative changes and "It" informs the reader that it existed originally in a void between our universe and others, in a dimension known as the Macroverse. It boasts to the reader that It is superior to anything on Earth and confirms that it chooses to prey on children because It believes their fears are easier to interpret in a physical form, which It claims is akin to "salting the meat". It attacks the three bullies in the form of Frankenstein's monster, ripping Vic's head off and mutilating Belch's face. Henry, driven insane, chases the Losers and gets lost. He eventually washes out of the sewers into a nearby river and is blamed for all of the child murders. Meanwhile, Bill discovers the "Ritual of Chüd", an ancient ritual that requires biting the tongue of It, that allows him to enter the Macroverse to confront It, who appears to the children as a giant spider. During the ritual, Bill encounters "The Turtle", the creator of the universe, who created It while vomiting after a stomach-ache. The Turtle explains that It can only be defeated during a battle of wills.

Bill enters the monster's mind through the Ritual of Chüd and discovers It's true form is a mass of destructive orange lights which It refers to as the "Deadlights". With the help of The Turtle, Bill is able to defeat It and send it back to its slumber. After the battle, the Losers get lost in the sewers until Beverly has sex with all the boys to connect childhood and adulthood and bring unity back to the group.[6] The Losers then swear a blood oath to return to Derry should It return in the future.